# Report Overview
Introduction and Problem Definition

Paralytic Ileus (PI) is a rare disorder of the intestine which is characterized by the paralysis of the intestinal peristalsis without any physical obstruction. This type of paralysis can be caused by the malfunction of the nerves and muscles in the intestines, abdominal surgery, and Parkinson’s disease. Diagnosis is made clinically, and it can present with symptoms like abdominal bloating, pain, nausea, vomiting, and constipation. Unfortunately, PI has a poor clinical outcome with a mortality rate of up to 40% in the ICU setting which is why an early prediction of mortality can be helpful for clinical decision making (1). 

Recent research from PROMINENT Labs has shown that using process mining on available history information of patients such as labs and prescriptions can increase predictive performance. Therefore, the aim of this research project is to investigate the performance of predicting mortality in PI patients when considering event logs and through the development of machine learning models. To validate the models, comparisons will be made to the data format used in a recent study of Ahmad et al. In his study, Ahmad et al develops a mortality prediction framework that combines the risk analysis of statistical methods with six different machine learning-based classification prediction models for critically ill PI patients. Ahmad et al recorded various scores to evaluate how well his models performed but the most important one was the area under the curve (AUC). Therefore, the AUC was to be recorded in this research project. To fairly compare the results, the same patient cohorts as Ahmad et al were utilized. The MIMIC-III database was to be used to construct an event log containing all the records of patients with PI disease (n=1021). Each trace corresponds to one patient and includes information about their encounter with the PI diagnosis. What helps even more is that some of these traces include historical data about the patient from past encounters.

Developed by MIT Lab, MIMIC-III is  a publicly available health record database for critically ill patients. In total, this database contains the deidentified data of about 38,000 patients over the age of 18. This data has been collected from the year 2001 to 2012 from the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston, Massachusetts. The clinical data includes demographics, laboratory tests, medications prescribed, and more. Of the 38,000 patients, 1021 are diagnosed with PI.

The objective of this research project is to develop baselines models (Logistic Regression, Decision Tree, Random Forest, and support vector machines (SVM)) that are built from event log data. However, event logs cannot be used to train machine learning models directly, so different strategies must be investigated to extract features from these event logs to transfer to a format suitable for machine learning. In this transition, specific features including their history data will  be selected based on their importance and possible effect on the patient in the future. Moreover, the results will extend the baseline comparison by comparing different methods that Ahmad et al did not use. The ideal outcome is to develop a mortality predictor using a process mining approach that ideally outperforms the method of Ahmad et al.
